[MUSIC]
>> Nina Zakharenko: So far, we've been
writing a lot of lines of code, and
all of them have just been getting
executed one by one by one.
So an if statement is a way for
JavaScript to decide what piece of code it
wants to execute,
depending on which condition is true.
So here's a super simple example.
The anatomy of an if statement
is lowered if, followed by open
parentheses, a condition which most
evaluate to a Boolean expression,
closing parentheses, and
then open bracket, the code that
will be executed only if that
condition is met, and closing bracket.
So let's try this out.
>> Nina Zakharenko: We're
gonna make a variable
called number of apples.
We're gonna set it to 5.
And we're gonna write
our first if statement.
>> Nina Zakharenko: So let's say,
if we have more than three apples,
and if you're using the current
developer console and you wanna continue
on line by line without having,
it just evaluate when you press Enter,
press Shift and Enter and
it will go to the next line.
>> Nina Zakharenko: So
if we have more than three apples,
that's console.log and
message to ourselves say, I'm apple rich!.
>> Nina Zakharenko: So if we run it,
we will see that I'm really,
really apple rich.
I have all of five apples.
If I go ahead and change this variable,
say, I make it 1,
and I rerun my if statement,
you guys can do that by pressing
up until you get to the line
of code which you wanna rerun,
nothing happens because I'm apple poor.
>> Nina Zakharenko: So
there's ways to add on
to one if statement.
The first way to do it is an else.
So if your condition is not met,
you always run the line of code
that's in the else statement.
There's no other path of execution so one
or the other line of code will get wrong.
There's also something called an else
if and you can have as many of those in
between your if and your else as you
want and those are subconditions.
So let's do an exercise.
>> Nina Zakharenko: I hope you
guys like fruits.
Brian was tupperware and I'm fruits, so.
>> Students: [LAUGH]
>> Nina Zakharenko: Here we have this long
if, else if, and else statement.
Let's just go over the anatomy
of this really quickly.
So the if statement stays
in the same format.
The else if must be on the line after it.
And besides for adding an else in front,
the format is the same,
the else is little bit different.
There is no condition for
it, no parentheses.
Because it will always get run.
So we have three conditions here.
One for if we have more than zero apples,
one if we have less than three apples,
and the other one is like we're out.
So let's try and change this variable and
see how our path of execution changes.
So if I have -99 apples,
everything's the same.
If I have 2 apples,
someone tell me which of
these conditions will get executed?
>> Nina Zakharenko: What's
that?
>> Students: [CROSSTALK]
>> Nina Zakharenko: Yep, an apple.
>> Nina Zakharenko: We'll also print Go
to the store.
Let's run this.
I'm sorry.
We won't print go to the store
because we're in an else if.
If we change our number to a value
that's greater than three,
we will print.
>> Male Student 1: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Nina Zakharenko: Yeah,
let's change this.
>> Female Student 1: It looks like if you
had it set to two, if you had five set
to two, then it's going through and
reading the conditions and it just
happened to come to eat an apple first,
even though it meant both conditions,
right?
>> Nina Zakharenko: Yeah, so if I go and
I change this, let's say less than five,
even though these two things conflict,
it'll go to this one first.
>> Male Student 1: Does JavaScript have
the concept of a switch statement?
>> Male Student 2: It
does.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Does this make sense
to everyone?
>> Female Student 1: Apples
are greater than five.
It makes more sense.
>> Nina Zakharenko: Okay.
>> Nina Zakharenko: It's not greater than
five, it's not less than three so
we've got no apples left.
So it's a nice subtle logic bug
>> Nina Zakharenko: And
in order to fix this,
we would put equals here.
>> Nina Zakharenko: So
that should fix our, oops.
>> Female Student 1: Four is sitting right
in between three and five, so [INAUDIBLE]
>> Nina Zakharenko: This will
print Go to the store.